.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024-2026 Aldo Gonzalez
.\" Copyright (c) 2013-2016 Allan Jude <allanjude@freebsd.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2010,2011 Ivan Nash Dreckman
.\" Copyright (c) 2007,2008 Constantin Gonzalez
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd Apr 11, 2026
.Dt ZXFER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm zxfer
.Nd "replicate ZFS filesystems, snapshots, and properties"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl b
.Op Fl B
.Op Fl c Ar "FMRI|pattern[ FMRI|pattern]..."
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl D Ar 'progress dialog options'
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl F
.Op Fl g Ar days
.Op Fl I Ar properties,to,ignore
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Op Fl k
.Op Fl m
.Op Fl n
.Brq -N path/to/src | -R path/to/src
.Op Fl o Ar option1=value1,option2=value2...
.Op Fl O Ar user@host
.Op Fl P
.Op Fl s
.Op Fl T Ar user@host
.Op Fl U
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl V
.Op Fl w
.Op Fl x Ar pattern
.Op Fl Y
.Op Fl z
.Op Fl Z Ar "zstd compression command"
.Ar destination
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Pp
Where
.Em destination
is a ZFS filesystem e.g.
.Pa poolname/fsname
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility replicates ZFS filesystems (including snapshots and properties) using
.Xr zfs 8
.Va send
to do the heavy lifting. It can transfer dataset properties,
optionally override them, and create missing descendants so the destination
matches the source layout. This is desirable when we want parity between
the source and destination snapshot regimes, or when we need a single
command that transfers both data and relevant dataset metadata.
.Pp
The transfer process allows for the properties of each filesystem to be
replicated and specific properties overridden as necessary. For example,
.Va compression ,
.Va readonly ,
and
.Va copies
are properties that are likely to be useful to override if
we are using this utility to make backups. If the destination filesystems
do not exist,
.Nm
will automatically create them.
.Pp
The script also allows
the backup and restore of the original filesystem properties so that
if it is desirable to backup the filesystem(s) for archival purposes
using
.Va compression
etc. as overrides, the original properties may be restored without the
user having to make a note of what those original properties were.
.Pp
.Nm
requires privileges sufficient for the requested
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zpool 8 ,
and
.Xr ssh 1
operations. In practice this often means root, delegated ZFS privileges, or a
remote wrapper such as
.Dq pfexec
or
.Dq doas ,
depending on platform and workflow.
.Pp
Note that at present, the usage of spaces in
.Xr zfs 8
filesystem names is NOT supported. There is no plan to support it without
someone else doing the coding or a good funding proposal coming my way.
.Sh DISCLAIMER/WARNING
You MUST read, understand and agree to the disclaimer in the BSD license
before applying any of these examples or using
.Nm .
(See the file "COPYING" that should have been included with this utility.)
Review the command line carefully and validate your workflow on test datasets,
throwaway pools, or a disposable host before using
.Nm
against production data. Keep independent backups and confirm the option
combination you intend to use, especially when enabling snapshot deletion,
rollback, migration, or property restore modes.
.Pp
Modifying an example first is a good way to start using the script, as
there are some options (e.g. -d and -F) that are in practice
always used.
.Sh SNAPSHOTS
.Nm
as a backup/restore solution is designed to be used
hand-in-hand with a regular snapshotting
regime. If there is no regular snapshotting regime in place then the results
won't be nearly as good.
.Nm
would still be useful to reliably and easily copy
a pool for example, but you would be missing the main point of the program.
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options control the
.Xr zfs 8
.Va send
replication workflow managed by
.Nm .
Unless noted otherwise the semantics apply uniformly across all invocations.
.Pp
Please note that options with arguments (e.g. -R, -N
and the like) can not be concatenated after other options.
(e.g. -vFdR
.Va source
.Va destination
will fail. You should use instead:
-vFd -R
.Va source
.Va destination
)
Otherwise this will confuse getopts and
.Xr zfs 8
will complain that "dataset already exists".
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl b
Small (b)eep mode. Play a failure tune before exit with failure
so that you don't have to monitor
the terminal to know when a lengthy backup or restore finishes.
(This is not as yet supported in (Open) Solaris.)
To save insult being added to injury, the failure beep will not play
during errors that
.Nm
discovers in the initialization phase, beeps will only occur if an error
has the possibility of occurring after significant time has elapsed.
.Pp
.It Fl B
Large (B)eep mode. Similar to (b) but suitable for use at the end of a script.
It plays a success or failure tune before exit. If you are executing
.Nm
multiple times, use -b for everything but the last execution, for which you
should use -B.
.It Fl e
R(e)store property mode. This restores all filesystem properties from the
backup file mentioned in the previous option.
.Pp
A word of warning:
In order to allow the restoration of filesystems within the hierarchy,
.Nm
will check the exact current keyed metadata path
.Pa .zxfer_backup_info.v2/h/<id-chunks>/.zxfer_backup_info.v2
in the hardened metadata directory
.Pq Pa ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR/source/dataset/path/
for the requested source and destination roots. The current lossless-key path is
checked first with a read-only fallback to the retired checksum-keyed v2
filename when it is absent. The metadata must also carry the
.Dq #zxfer property backup file
header and a supported
.Dq #format_version:2
marker before
.Nm
will consume any v2 source-root-relative restore rows. Older, unversioned, or otherwise unsupported
backup metadata layouts are not supported; restore the properties only from
files stored in the hardened directory (which defaults to
.Pa /var/db/zxfer
and can be changed by exporting
.Ev ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR Ns ).
.It Fl h
Prints (h)elp.
.It Fl k
Bac(k)up property mode. This backs up the original filesystem property settings
to the current keyed metadata path
.Pa .zxfer_backup_info.v2/h/<id-chunks>/.zxfer_backup_info.v2
stored inside the hardened metadata directory
.Pq Pa ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR/source/dataset/path/.
This file lives outside the dataset mountpoints so unprivileged users cannot
pre-create symlinks. The
.Dq #zxfer property backup file
header and
.Dq #format_version:2
marker are written automatically so future restore runs can validate the
metadata format before consuming v2 source-root-relative rows. The
.Aq id-chunks
path components are a lossless identity derived from the full source and
destination pair, split into bounded chunks so long dataset names do not exceed
per-component filesystem limits and distinct replication runs do not overwrite
each other just because they share the same source tail. Restore still
recognizes the retired checksum-keyed v2 filename as a read-only fallback when
the current lossless-key path is absent. The metadata
header also records the full
.Dq source_root
and
.Dq destination_root
dataset identifiers for the backup run, while the body rows retain
source-root-relative dataset paths later consumed by
.Fl e .
Current-format files emit only those versioned root markers; the older
compatibility alias lines are no longer written.
For example, if you are backing up
.Pa tank/src
and you keep the default
.Ev ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR
of
.Pa /var/db/zxfer ,
the metadata path
.Pa /var/db/zxfer/tank/src/.zxfer_backup_info.v2/h/74616e6b2f7372630a6261636b75702f647374/.zxfer_backup_info.v2
would hold all the information about the original values of the filesystem
properties, and some other useful info. Set
.Ev ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR
to point at an alternate secure directory owned by root or the effective UID if you need to relocate the
metadata.
.Pp
This allows us to use the
.Op Fl o
option freely, e.g. specifying
.Va copies ,
.Va compression
etc. without having to remember what the original options were.
.Pp
If the current source was itself produced from an earlier
.Nm
property backup, chained
.Fl k
runs now forward that original-source property provenance into the next hop's
backup metadata instead of re-recording intermediate override or local-property
drift as the restored baseline.
.Pp
When
.Fl k
publishes backup metadata through a remote target specified by
.Fl T ,
.Nm
also resolves and validates the target host's
.Xr cat 1
helper through the same secure remote-helper path instead of assuming a fixed
remote binary location.
.It Fl n
Dry ru(n) mode. Prints out the commands that would otherwise execute, but
current releases now treat this as a strict no-exec preview: launcher ssh
preflight, remote helper validation, live backup-restore checks,
unsupported-property discovery, snapshot discovery, and
.Fl D
templates that reference
.Ql %%size%%
are all skipped instead of validated against the live source or destination.
This means dry runs no longer render the eventual send/receive or
property-reconcile commands, because those require live snapshot state. Use
this when you need a safe preflight preview rather than live validation. When combined with
.Fl k ,
.Nm
also previews the local or remote secure backup-directory preparation and
staged backup-metadata write commands under
.Ev ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR
instead of creating, chmodding, or writing those metadata files during
preflight; chained
.Fl k
backups also preview any forwarded provenance alias write. When combined with
.Fl s
or
.Fl m ,
.Nm
only previews the source-side snapshot plus the migration service-disable,
service-enable, and unmount commands; it does not execute them or refresh
cached state as though those actions had already happened.
.It Fl o
(o)verride property mode. Property overrides are specified with commas to separate.
.Pp
e.g.
.Fl o Ar property1=value1,property2=value2...
.Pp
If one value must contain a literal comma, quote the full
.Fl o
argument and escape that comma as
.Ql \e, ,
for example
.Fl o Ar 'user:note=value\e,with\e,commas' .
For example,
.Fl o Ar compression=lzjb
will cause all destination filesystems to be set to lzjb compression. If using
recursive mode,
.Nm
sets the override on the replicated root and leaves descendants inherited when
the property can inherit and their parent already provides the requested value;
non-inheritable overrides, such as quotas and reservations, remain local on
descendants.
Note that this option will also override any values that would otherwise be
.Cm set
by "-P". Invoking this option will also create the destination filesystem(s)
if they do not already exist.
.It Fl P
Transfer (P)roperty mode. This causes the destination to have properties explicitly
.Cm set
(i.e. with property
.Va sources
as
.Va local )
to exactly the same properties as the source. If the destination filesystems do
not exist, they will be created with the correct properties.
.Pp
If using recursive modes, child
filesystems have property
.Va sources
(as in, the fourth column of
.Cm # zfs get all pool/filesystem
) that are made either
.Va local ,
(if the
.Va source
is
.Va local )
or
.Va inherited
(if the
.Va source
is
.Va default
or
.Va inherited )
as per the source filesystem. Note that
.Va inherited
behaves in a similar manner to
.Va default .
If you were to set a given property of the parent of a child filesystem, the
child would have that same property's source listed as "inherited from..."
whether that child property source had been
.Va default
or
.Va inherited .
.Pp
There are several properties that
must be set (using
.Cm zfs create )
at filesystem creation time. These are:
.Va casesensitivity ,
.Va normalization ,
.Va utf8only .
If you are trying to replicate such a filesystem where one of these properties is
different from source to destination, destroy the destination
filesystems before you begin otherwise the utility will fail with an error.
.Pp
There are several other properties that may not be technically readonly
but it was
judged that it would not make sense to try and transfer them. They are:
.Va type ,
.Va creation ,
.Va used ,
.Va available ,
.Va referenced ,
.Va compressratio ,
.Va mounted ,
.Va version ,
.Va primarycache ,
.Va secondarycache ,
.Va usedbysnapshots ,
.Va usedbydataset ,
.Va usedbychildren ,
.Va usedbyrefreservation ,
.Va version ,
.Va volsize ,
.Va mountpoint .
There are several properties that may be unsupported on some platforms and hence will
not be transferred via
.Nm ,
they are:
.Va idevices ,
.Va aclmode ,
.Va aclinherit ,
.Va nbmand ,
.Va shareiscsi ,
.Va vscan ,
.Va xattr .
.It Fl v
(v)erbose mode.
.El
.Ss ZFS send/receive mode
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl c
A space delimited list of SMF services in quotes to be temporarily disabled
before unmounting the source, then re-enable after changing the mountpoint
of the destination. Requires -m.
.It Fl d
(d)elete snapshots on the destination that are absent on the source. This may
be necessary to function properly anyway, in a similar fashion to
.Pp
.Nm
batches those snapshot deletions into background
.Xr zfs 8
.Cm destroy
commands so replication can continue while snapshots are removed. The background
jobs are tied to the lifetime of
.Nm :
its EXIT trap kills any remaining destroy processes when the main script
terminates so snapshot deletes never run unattended. If
.Nm
exits before the kernel finishes destroying the targeted snapshots, rerun
.Nm
with
.Fl d
to resume cleanup;
.Nm
will zxfer_relaunch the pending destroys on the next pass.
.It Fl D
.Nm
will pipe
.Xr zfs 8
.Va send
through the indicated command and parameters, to create a progress bar.
A number of macros will be replaced with values before the command is executed:
.Bl -tag -width a
.It %%size%%
Will be replaced with the estimated size of the snapshot.
On remote or multi-job runs,
.Nm
may use a cheaper approximate probe for this value to reduce startup latency.
When combined with
.Fl n ,
templates that reference
.Ql %%size%%
no longer probe the live source; strict dry-run leaves size estimates unknown
because send planning is skipped entirely.
.It %%title%%
Will be replaced with the name of the source dataset@snapshot.
.El
.Pp
Example:
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl O Ar user@host Fl D Ar 'bar -s %%size%%' Fl R Ar source destination
This will occur if you are using
.Nm
for routine backups and in the interim, culling snapshots on the source.
The snapshot corresponding to the most recent snapshot on the destination
often gets deleted on the source. Any snapshots on the destination more
recent than the most recent common snapshot must be deleted for
.Cm zfs send
to work.
.It Fl F
Pass (F) to
.Xr zfs 8
.Cm receive
so the destination side will roll back to the most recent snapshot that
matches the stream. This forcibly destroys any newer snapshots or data that
only exist on the destination and allows incremental sends to proceed when
the target has diverged.
.It Fl g
(g)randfather protection. Specify a number of days old (relative to the system
date) at and above which snapshots on the destination won't be deleted. For use
with
.Op Fl d .
This allows a safeguard to protect the "grandfathers" in a
Grandfather-Father-Son (GFS) snapshot
collection on a destination. Grandfathers (as defined by
.Nm )
are the snapshots that never get
deleted (often yearly, half yearly or quarterly snapshots).
.Pp
Note that for
this to work properly, you must set
.Op Fl g
so that it does not inadvertently protect the "fathers" which will be deleted on
the source by your snapshot management tool, and hence will need to be deleted
on the
destination. If you go a long time between backups with an otherwise well set
.Op Fl g ,
you may have fathers on the destination that are the age of grandfathers and so
you will need to either relax the number of days provided for, or manually
delete those fathers.
.Pp
For example,
specifying -g 375 should protect snapshots as old or older than 375 days,
which could be useful where grandfathers are yearly and monthly fathers are
kept for a period of a year or less. This gives us 9 days of grace period
to make a backup without throwing an error, but do note that during
this grace period grandfathers
less than 375 days old are not protected.
.It Fl I Ar properties,to,ignore
Do not copy this comma separated list of properties when performing replication.
Useful for skipping properties like quotas that can interfere with replication,
or properties that are not supported on the destination.
.It Fl j Ar jobs
Run up to this many zfs send/receive jobs concurrently and use the explicit
per-dataset source snapshot-discovery path when determining the work queue.
When jobs is greater than 1, zxfer uses a direct per-dataset source listing
pipeline instead of the single recursive snapshot list. Local-origin and
remote-origin runs through
.Fl O
require a resolved
.Sy parallel
helper on the executing origin host. zxfer intentionally validates only helper
existence through the secure-PATH model, then assumes the operator or package
supplied an implementation compatible with the GNU Parallel-style options used
by the rendered source-discovery pipeline.
zxfer does not silently fall back to the serial recursive listing once
.Fl j
is greater than 1. The default is 1, which disables background sends and keeps
source snapshot discovery on the serial recursive listing path. Raising this
value can hide WAN latency or speed up large replications, but will also
increase memory, CPU and I/O load. Source listing runs as a tracked background
helper with staged stderr and registered PID cleanup. The long-lived
send/receive workers launched for this path run under a shared supervisor that
records launch/completion metadata and tears them down through validated
process-group or owned-child-set cleanup instead of signaling a bare
wrapper-shell PID. zxfer also serializes conflicting ancestor/descendant
destination receives on the same target, even when spare job slots remain, so
parent and child datasets do not receive concurrently.
.It Fl m
After sending all snapshots, (m)igrate the source to the destination filesystem by
unmounting the source filesystem and changing the new filesystem's
mountpoint to that of the source. This option includes -s. It also includes
-P. Note that
.Nm
does not prevent you from migrating a default mountpoint
(e.g. pool/filesystem) to something that will be potentially confusing, so
be sure that this is what you want before executing.
.Pp
Note also that
.Op Fl O
and
.Op Fl T
(i.e. remote transfers) are not supported with this option enabled.
.Pp
With
.Fl n ,
these migration preflight steps are previewed only.
.It Fl N
Replicate the listed filesystem. Note the provisos listed above in
.Op Fl R .
It works similarly but is (N)ot recursive.
e.g.  specifying -N
.Pa tank/tmp
will transfer only
.Pa tank/tmp .
.It Fl x Ar pattern
Exclude any datasets whose names match the supplied regular expression from
the recursive replication list. The pattern is passed to
.Xr grep 1
.Fl v ,
so be sure to escape shell metacharacters or provide quotes where appropriate.
Useful when a recursive send should omit scratch datasets or other prefixes.
To exclude only
.Pa tank/data
without also matching
.Pa tank/data.bob ,
use an anchored pattern such as
.Dq ^tank/data$ .
.It Fl O
Specify an (O)rigin user@host. This allows transfers FROM a remote host via ssh.
e.g. Whatever filesystems you specify as the source are taken to exist on that
remote host.
.Pp
For this to work, you must have a working ssh
connection from your local machine to the remote host, using public key based
authentication (so that you won't have to keep entering a password every time
a command is sent over ssh). You must have
.Nm
on your local machine. The remote host must support
.Xr zfs 1 ,
and so does your local machine if
.Op Fl T
is not also used.
.Pp
This fork is exercised across current OpenZFS 2.0+ environments on maintained
FreeBSD branches, Linux with OpenZFS, OmniOS/illumos, and OpenZFS on macOS.
For releases published after 2026-05-01, the FreeBSD support baseline is
FreeBSD 14.x and 15.x; FreeBSD 13.x and other end-of-life branches are not
guaranteed. Remote helper resolution is designed to tolerate
different absolute
.Xr zfs 8
paths on each host, but property support can still differ across operating
systems and ZFS versions. When mixing platforms or versions, validate
property behavior carefully and consider
.Fl I
or
.Fl U
if the destination cannot support every source property.
.Pp
Note that if at all possible, do not try and be clever
and run
.Nm
with both an origin and a target host. While this may work,
the transfer will be piped from the remote origin to the local machine and from
there to the remote target machine, which will be slow as it is
not a direct path.
.Pp
The syntax for this command is -O user@remote_host.
.Pp
e.g. -O root@192.168.0.1
.Pp
Please note that if you are using Solaris, you will most likely need to use
"pfexec" (similar to sudo) and have a suitably privileged user. Copy the
quotes and spacing exactly:
.Pp
e.g. -O "user1@192.168.0.1 pfexec"
.Pp
The
.Fl O
and
.Fl T
values are treated as literal whitespace-delimited tokens. Outer shell quoting
is fine, but embedded quote characters or backslash escapes inside the value
are rejected instead of being silently re-tokenized.
.Pp
The reason this works is because the commands that are related to
reading/writing/modifying data will be prefaced with in normal circumstances:
.Pp
ssh root@192.168.0.1 command ...
.Pp
So with Solaris, specifying the pfexec at the end results in:
.Pp
ssh user1@192.168.0.1 pfexec command ...
.Pp
.It Fl R
(R)ecursively replicate all filesystems under the specified source. If not
specifying
.Op Fl N ,
you must invoke one and only one of either
.Op Fl R
or
.Op Fl N .
Note that if you enable this option, you must specify only one filesystem,
and that it starts without a "/". e.g. specifying -R
.Pa tank/tmp
will transfer
.Pa tank/tmp ,
.Pa tank/tmp/foo,
.Pa tank/tmp/foo/bar
etc.
.Pp
Also note that a trailing slash on the source filesystem has a similar effect
as it has in
.Xr cp 1 .
This would primarily be used in restoring filesystems, especially pools.
See Ex3.
.It Fl s
Make a (s)napshot of the source before replication. Note that you might want to
transfer a current snapshot at the end of a transfer, as the initial transfer
might take a long time. This would leave you with an old snapshot on the
destination. To do this you will need to execute your command again
at the end, and ensure that a current snapshot is taken before or during the
second execution. e.g. use this option to ensure that a relatively current
snapshot exists, create it manually, or wait until your own snapshotting
regime does the job for you (if you have one).
.Pp
With
.Fl n ,
.Nm
only previews this snapshot command.
.Pp
.It Fl T
Specify a (T)arget user@host. This allows transfers TO a remote host via ssh.
e.g. Whatever filesystem you specify as the destination will be where the
source filesystems will be sent.
.Pp
See the section on
.Op Fl O
for notes, usage advice and warnings, as this option is very similar in
operation.
.Pp
The syntax for this command is -T user@remote_host. e.g. -T root@192.168.1.2
.Pp
Again, please note that if you are using Solaris, you will most likely need to use
"pfexec" (similar to sudo) and have a suitably privileged user. Copy the
quotes and spacing exactly:
.Pp
e.g. -T "user1@192.168.0.1 pfexec"
.Pp
Like
.Op Fl O ,
.It Fl U
Skip replicating any properties that are not supported by the destination.
Before replication begins, zxfer probes the current destination within the
OpenZFS 2.0+ support floor and removes source properties that the destination
does not accept for the current dataset type.
This is a current-platform skip mechanism, not a compatibility bridge for
pre-OpenZFS 2.0 destinations.
.It Fl v
(v) verbose mode
.It Fl V
(V)ery verbose mode, prints debugging messages to stderr and emits end-of-run
profiling counters plus startup latency, trap-cleanup timing, and accumulated
stage timings for ssh setup, snapshot listing, and diff/sort hot paths, along
with runtime artifact/cache-object counts, command-rendering counts, live
destination snapshot recheck counts, ssh control-socket wait,
remote-capability cache wait, capability-bootstrap source, and direct remote
helper-probe counters. While the run is active it also prints prefixed live
remote ssh commands, remote probe commands, and any ssh control-socket
check/open commands before each execution so slow startup or remote-probe phases are
visible in real time.
.It Fl w
uses zfs ra(w) send mode
.It Fl Y
(Y)ield after no zfs send or zfs destroy commands are executed or 8 iterations
have been performed, whichever comes first.
.It Fl z
Pipe the send stream through zstd -3 compression and then decode it at the
remote side using zstd -d. This option requires either
.Op Fl O
or
.Op Fl T
because compression only occurs when traffic flows over ssh.
This converts:
.Pp
.Dl zfs send dataset@snap1 | ssh user@host "/sbin/zfs receive destination"
.Pp
to
.Pp
.Dl zfs send dataset@snap1 | zstd -3 | ssh user@host "zstd -d | /sbin/zfs receive destination"
.Pp
Remote source snapshot-list metadata discovery
.Pq Fl O No with Fl j No and Fl z
uses the selected compression/decompression pipeline when ssh is active,
including the remote parallel source-discovery path before zxfer decides
whether any snapshots actually need transfer.
.It Fl Z
Pass the zstd command to use during compression.
.Op Fl O
or
.Op Fl T
must also be provided.
.Pp
e.g.
.Pp
-Z "zstd -T0 -3"
.Pp
This will modify the default -z option to
.Pp
.Dl zfs send dataset@snap1 | zstd -T0 -3 | ssh user@host "zstd -d | /sbin/zfs receive"
.Pp
Like
.Fl O
and
.Fl T ,
the
.Fl Z
value must be expressible as literal whitespace-delimited tokens; embedded
quote characters or backslash escapes are rejected instead of being
re-tokenized.
.Pp
Higher custom levels such as
.Li -9
can improve compression ratio, but they consume substantially more CPU time and
are therefore not the default.

.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Note that some of these example commands are lengthy, so be sure to fix
the line wrapping appropriately. Also if you wonder why
.Nm
isn't transferring anything, please read the section titled SNAPSHOTS.
.Ss Ex1 - Backup a pool (including snapshots and properties)
We have a pool called
.Pa storage
and we want to back it up to
.Pa backup01/pools ,
along with all its snapshots. Grandfather snapshots are yearly, fathers are
monthly and are deleted after 365 days.
The resultant filesystem hierarchy should look like so:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Pa backup01/pools/storage
.It
.Pa backup01/pools/storage/home
.It
.Pa backup01/pools/storage/back
.It
etc.
.El
To back this up while:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Op Fl g
protecting (grandfather) snapshots older than 375 days
.It
.Op Fl P
copying across the properties of each filesystem
.It
.Op Fl k
storing the original filesystem properties in the file
.Pa backup01/pools/.zxfer_backup_info.storage
.It
.Op Fl F
forcing a rollback of destination to the most recent snapshot. Given even
mounting the filesystem will cause a change and hence cause
.Cm zfs receive
to fail with an error, enabling this
is the way to go. Otherwise you would be modifying(!) a backup,
wanting to keep the changes you are making(!?) and also wanting to copy more
stuff to the backup (hence it's still being used as a backup)... well
if that's what you want then don't use
this option.
.It
.Op Fl d
deleting stale snapshots that don't exist on the source
(e.g. if using
a snapshot management script such as
.Xr zfs-snapshot-mgmt 8 ,
snapshots are regularly taken and regularly deleted to leave a range of
frequencies of snapshots at different vintages. If you are regularly backing
up to another pool which is stored off-site as is
.Em highly
recommended, you may want
to delete the stale snapshots on the backup pool without having to manage the
snapshots there too. This is especially true for those pools that are usually
not connected to a machine, e.g. if you are using HDD as backup media. Note that
.Cm zfs send
will also refuse to work if you have newer snapshots on destination than
the most recent common snapshot on both, so it's easier to just enable it.)
.It
.Op Fl v
seeing lots of output (verbose)
.It
.Op Fl V
(V)ery verbose output sent to stderr
.It
.Op Fl R
copying the source filesystem recursively
.El
use the following command:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -dFkPv -g 375 -R storage backup01/pools
.Pp
Note that this same command will work for both the initial replication
and subsequent replications (which are potentially much faster due to
incremental transfers being used). Also note that if you don't have any
snapshots on the source, nothing will be transferred. You can create
a snapshot for this very occasion by adding the -s option.
.Ss Ex2 - Backup pool to HDD
Using HDDs as backup media was in large part a motivation for writing this
utility. (Using an e-SATA dock is particularly convenient). The source and
destination are the same as Ex1.
.Pp
We will want to increase the number of
.Va copies
to at
least 2 or more so that we have some protection against bad sectors. We won't
have protection against a HDD crash so use more than one HDD if you are doing
this (mirrored or otherwise). We may also want to override the
.Va compression
to make up for the multiplication in disk usage by the number of copies. Here
is the command:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -dFkPv -o copies=2,compression=lzjb -R storage backup01/pools
.Pp
.Ss Ex3 - Restore a pool
To restore the pools we have backed up in Examples 1 and 2, we would first
make sure that there is a new pool named
.Pa storage
to copy the backup to. Then we would issue the following command:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -deFPv -R backup01/pools/storage/ storage
.Pp
Note that the trailing slash enables us to copy the backed-up root filesystem
directly to the pool level, and then the child filesystems below that, which
is where we want them. If the pool name is to be changed,
the command becomes:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -deFPv -R backup01/pools/storage/ newpoolname
.Pp
.Ss Ex4 - Backup a filesystem
We might want to just backup a filesystem within a pool. That is easily done:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -dFkPv -N storage/home backup01/filesystems
.Pp
The resulting filesystem will be
.Pa backup01/filesystems/home .
This example will only replicate that exact filesystem
(i.e. it is non-recursive). If we wanted to recursively transfer all
filesystems under
.Pa storage/home
at the same time we could do so by changing the
.Op Fl N
to an
.Op Fl R .
.Pp
.Ss Ex5 - Restore a filesystem
To restore the filesystem backed up in Ex4, we would do so using the
following command:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -deFPv -N backup01/filesystems/home storage
.Pp
.Ss Ex6 - Migrate a filesystem
We might want to migrate a filesystem (including properties).
Note that this is only allowable when the original mountpoint is
not the default (i.e. pool/filesystem). In the following example,
the new filesystem will be located in
.Pa new_pool/location/fs .
If the old mountpoint was
.Pa /path/to/old_fs
then that will be the mountpoint of the new filesystem.
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -PmFdv -N original_pool/fs new_pool/location
.Pp
.Ss Ex7 - Compress a filesystem
If we want to compress a filesystem, it is not enough to simply
set a compression setting of some sort on that filesystem. This
will only cause new files to be compressed. If we want to compress
a filesystem, what we would want to do is to transfer it to another
location (where compression is enabled).
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -PmFdv -o compression=gzip -N original_pool/fs new_pool/location
.Pp
.Ss Ex8 - Compress a filesystem...
- and store it in the original location.
This is probably what you want to do instead of example 7. Usually
what we want to do when we want to compress
a filesystem - it is already in the location we want it to be, just
we haven't realized we wanted it compressed at the time. Or maybe
we want to do something similar to compression, like dedup, and it was
not supported at the time we created the filesystem. So it is not enough
to have the filesystem compressed in a new location, we want it in the
original location.
.Pp
If so, we will need to migrate the filesystem. Then, if necessary, we would
need to upgrade the original pool
to ensure that the new filesystem can do what it is we want it to do
(e.g. dedup perhaps), and then transfer it back. Here are the steps.
.Pp
1. Ensure you have set aside a time where nothing will be reading or writing
to the filesystem(s) in question. If you are performing this operation on a
system filesystem (e.g. something like
.Pa zroot/usr )
then ensure that you are performing these operations from a recovery disk
(e.g. Fixit # in FreeBSD). Also it is a very good idea to ensure that you
have made backups of the filesystems you are going to perform this operation
on.
.Pp
2. Migrate the filesystems to a new location. e.g.
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -PmFdv -N original_pool/fs new_pool/location
.Pp
3. Triple check that the new filesystems are as they should be. Be very,
very, very careful here. It is a good idea to have made a backup before
doing this next step. In fact, it's probably worth practicing on a system
you don't care about first. And do not, repeat do not, blame me if something
goes wrong.
.Pp
4. Destroy the original filesystem. e.g.
.Pp
zfs destroy original_pool/fs
.Pp
5. Ensure that the original pool is upgraded to do what you want it to do
(e.g. dedup perhaps, though you will need to change the option setting
appropriately).
.Pp
6. Migrate the filesystem back, but with the overrides you want. e.g.
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -PmFdv -o compression=gzip -N new_pool/location/fs original_pool
.Pp
.Ss Ex9 - Backup a pool to a remote host
Notice this is the same as in Ex2 with the exception of option
.Op Fl T ,
and uses the same options which
have been explained in that example. Note that if you use Solaris you will
most likely need to specify pfexec (refer to the
.Op Fl O
section).
Here is the command:
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -dFkPv -o copies=2,compression=lzjb -T root@192.168.123.1 -R storage backup01/pools
.Pp
.Ss Ex10 - Restore a pool from a remote host
Use the following command, assuming that you are restoring from a situation as
in Ex9. Again, if using Solaris refer to
.Op Fl O .
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm -deFPv -O root@192.168.123.1 -R backup01/pools/storage/ storage
.Pp
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev ZXFER_SSH_USER_KNOWN_HOSTS_FILE"
.It Ev ZXFER_BACKUP_DIR
Secure directory owned by root or the effective UID that holds `.zxfer_backup_info.*` metadata generated by
.Fl k
and consumed by
.Fl e .
Defaults to
.Pa /var/db/zxfer
and must be an absolute path that is not writable by unprivileged users.
.It Ev ZXFER_SECURE_PATH
Overrides the whitelist of directories that zxfer trusts when it resolves
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr ssh 1 ,
.Xr awk 1 ,
and other helper binaries. The default value is
.Pa /sbin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin .
Only absolute directories are honored so zxfer cannot be tricked into executing
programs from the current working directory or other user-controlled paths.
The computed allowlist also becomes the live runtime
.Ev PATH ,
and zxfer also exports the same value before remote capability handshakes,
helper-discovery probes, backup-directory helpers, and backup-metadata helper
scripts run, so every trusted helper directory that later bare command lookups
may need must appear here or be added through
.Ev ZXFER_SECURE_PATH_APPEND .
.It Ev ZXFER_SECURE_PATH_APPEND
Appends extra absolute directories to the secure PATH whitelist, allowing
administrators to point zxfer at custom locations (both locally and on hosts
referenced by
.Fl O
and
.Fl T )
without replacing the stock list. These appended directories also become part
of the exported runtime
.Ev PATH .
.It Ev ZXFER_SSH_BATCH_MODE
Overrides the default
.Ql yes
value that zxfer passes as
.Cm BatchMode
for its own
.Xr ssh 1
connections.
.It Ev ZXFER_SSH_STRICT_HOST_KEY_CHECKING
Overrides the default
.Ql yes
value that zxfer passes as
.Cm StrictHostKeyChecking
for its own
.Xr ssh 1
connections.
.It Ev ZXFER_SSH_USER_KNOWN_HOSTS_FILE
Optional absolute path that zxfer passes as
.Cm UserKnownHostsFile
for its own
.Xr ssh 1
connections. When unset, zxfer still relies on the local
.Xr ssh 1
configuration and defaults for known-hosts file discovery even though it
forces
.Cm BatchMode=yes
and
.Cm StrictHostKeyChecking=yes .
.It Ev ZXFER_SSH_USE_AMBIENT_CONFIG
When set to
.Ql 1 ,
.Ql yes ,
.Ql true ,
or
.Ql on ,
zxfer stops adding its own
.Cm BatchMode ,
.Cm StrictHostKeyChecking ,
and
.Cm UserKnownHostsFile
options, so remote connections fall back entirely to the ambient local
.Xr ssh 1
configuration.
.It Ev ZXFER_ERROR_LOG
Absolute path to a local file where zxfer should append the same delimited
failure report that it writes to
.Dv stderr
on non-zero exits. The parent directory must already exist, be owned by root
or the effective UID, and not be writable by other users unless the sticky bit
is set. Any symlinked path component is refused, existing log files must be
owned by root or the effective UID and already use mode 0600, and zxfer stages
appends through a sibling temporary file before the final rename when the
parent is writable. Appends are coordinated through a metadata-bearing lock
directory that records PID, process-start identity, hostname, purpose, and
creation time. Writable log parents use a sibling lock; existing logs under
trusted but non-writable parents use an exact log-path fallback lock under a
validated temp root. Stale owners are reaped after validation. If zxfer cannot
append the report, or if a successful append cannot release that lock cleanly,
it emits a warning to
.Dv stderr ;
when that happens during trap-time failure reporting, zxfer still preserves the
original exit status.
.It Ev ZXFER_UNSAFE_FAILURE_REPORT_COMMANDS
When set to
.Ql 1 ,
.Ql yes ,
.Ql true ,
or
.Ql on ,
zxfer preserves the
.Dq invocation
and
.Dq last_command
fields verbatim in structured failure reports
on both
.Dv stderr
and any
.Ev ZXFER_ERROR_LOG
mirror. The default behavior is to redact those two fields as
.Dq [redacted] ,
so this override is intended only for deliberate local debugging on trusted
log sinks.
.It Ev TMPDIR
Optional local scratch root for zxfer temporary files, FIFOs, and caches.
When set, it must resolve to an absolute directory owned by root or the
effective UID and not be writable by other users unless the sticky bit is set;
otherwise zxfer prefers a validated memory-backed temporary directory such as
.Pa /dev/shm
or
.Pa /run/shm
when available and falls back to the system temporary directory.
.Pp
Current releases coordinate shared ssh control-socket locks, per-process ssh
leases, remote capability-cache locks, and
.Ev ZXFER_ERROR_LOG
appends through metadata-bearing owned directories rather than bare PID files.
Native
.Pa .lock
and
.Pa lease.*
paths therefore appear as directories with owner metadata; zxfer validates and
reaps stale or corrupt owners before reuse and checks release failures instead
of ignoring them. Older plain ssh lease files and pid-only
.Pa .lock
directories from pre-metadata releases are unsupported; clear the stale entry
or cache root before rerunning a current release.
.Pp
The repository includes
.Pa examples/error-log-email-notify.sh ,
which shows how to set
.Ev ZXFER_ERROR_LOG ,
capture the current run's failure report from
.Dv stderr
along with any extra stderr warnings, and send an alert with
.Xr mailx 1 ,
BSD
.Xr mail 1 ,
or
.Xr sendmail 8 .
It also accepts a whitespace-separated
.Ev SRC_DATASETS
list so the wrapper can run multiple source roots sequentially while preserving
the first non-zero zxfer exit status.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
prints its immediate error message and then emits a delimited failure report to
.Dv stderr
on every non-zero exit. The block begins with
.Dq zxfer: failure report begin
and ends with
.Dq zxfer: failure report end ,
using stable
.Dq key: value
lines so operators can archive or post-process the output. When available, the
report includes the failure class and stage, source and destination context,
and redacted
.Dq invocation
/
.Dq last_command
placeholders by default. Raw ASCII control bytes inside report values are
escaped before output so the structured block stays inert in terminals,
pagers, and
.Ev ZXFER_ERROR_LOG .
Set
.Ev ZXFER_UNSAFE_FAILURE_REPORT_COMMANDS
only when you deliberately want those last two fields emitted verbatim for
local debugging.
.Pp
.Sh EXIT VALUES
.Nm
exits 0 on success and 2 if a command line option is incorrect. Runtime
failures exit with the original non-zero status reported by the failing helper
or command; zxfer-created validation failures that have no lower-level status
exit 1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr zfs 1 ,
.Xr zpool 1
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.Nm
targets current OpenZFS 2.0+ environments on maintained FreeBSD branches,
Linux with OpenZFS, OmniOS/illumos, and OpenZFS on macOS. For releases
published after 2026-05-01, the FreeBSD support baseline is FreeBSD 14.x and
15.x; FreeBSD 13.x and other end-of-life branches are not guaranteed.
Cross-version and cross-platform
replication can still expose property or helper-path differences, so
mixed-environment deployments should validate their exact send/receive and
property behavior before production use.
.Sh THANKS
Thanks to Constantin Gonzalez for his constant collaboration, guidance, and
his
providing of a sounding board for ideas and decisions as I developed this
script. It is no understatement to say that this script would not have been
developed to the extent it has and in its present form if not for his
encouragement, input on design decisions, and often just simply agreeing that
some features would be really cool, which spurred me on.
.Pp
Constantin's zfs-replicate script formed the original basis for this one, and
was very useful as a template for me to follow. Thanks to Constantin also
for generously allowing his code to be licensed under the BSD license, and
also encouraging the existence of this project under its own banner.
.Pp
You can read Constantin's blog "Constant Thinking" at
constantin.glez.de - if you are at all interested in the world of ZFS it is
worth reading regularly (his non-ZFS stuff is good too).
.Pp
.Sh AUTHORS
The basis for
.Nm ,
zfs-replicate, was written by Constantin Gonzalez. Ivan Nash Dreckman
built upon that work to create the additional code and documentation
required for
.Nm .
Constantin was invaluable throughout with providing feedback
on design decisions, suggestions and encouragement, not to mention initial
testing on Solaris.
.Sh BUGS
(This is a bug of ZFS on FreeBSD and not this script.)
There are several properties in FreeBSD that when set via "zfs create"
or "zfs set" will have the source stay as default while others are
set to local. This does not have any real impacts because these properties
are not inheritable. The properties are: quota, reservation, canmount,
refquota, refreservation.
.Pp
Note that FreeBSD does not support the transfer of several properties. See
.Op Fl P
section for details on this.
.Pp
There are several properties that are skipped over when transferring
or setting properties when testing has shown that creating or setting
them would fail on one or more supported platforms. If certain newer ZFS
properties are not being transferred, they may have been added to that current
platform filter. See the
.Op Fl P
documentation for current platform-specific limitations.
.Pp
Report bugs through the project issue tracker:
.Lk https://github.com/totalAldo/zxfer/issues
.Pp
For security-sensitive issues, follow the private reporting guidance in
.Pa SECURITY.md
instead of opening a public issue.
.Sh CREDITS
.Nm
is distributed under the BSD license. See the file COPYING for details.
.Pp
